Well, it is, it is.
Um, it is past one o'clock now.
Uh, we do have quorum, uh, to start the afternoon session.
Um, we will have, we will start off with, um,
Erica Locke, who, um, I is online.
Um, but we may come back to the first one on the agenda, um,
later if they come online.
Uh, Erica, welcome to the subcommittee
of the Health Sleep Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the subcommittee.
Um, we have got your written submission, um,
and we have allocated five minutes
for your oral presentation.
Um, so I'll hand that time over to you now.
Uh, ya just on mute.
You Koto. I'm having to use my phone, so I'm hoping
that will work for today.
I've got three, um, three points I'd like to make
and the first relates to my whakapapa.
I whakapapa to UA
and nui also to Scotland,
Ireland, and Denmark.
I toko
and appreciate very much the CRO by Kerry Holm, where she
spoke about those of us who spend our lives sitting
a stride, barbed wire of sense every time there is a failure
to honor teti.
There is shame and grief and anger and humiliation.
And I believe that this amendment
does not honor teti.
It does not give partnership to the voice of Maori in
decision makings and health.
The second point I wanted to, uh, speak to when speaking,
thinking about the changes which are
proposed was my experience living in Borneo in the eighties
where everybody had an identity card,
a different colored identity card,
and that card would, um, give you access
to different levels of healthcare.
I do not want to see private health
become the norm in New Zealand, where those
who have private health insurance can receive quality public
healthcare and those who don't have the money
simply can't access care.
I find the situation in the United States
where someone can't afford to pay
for an asthma inhaler dies from an asthma attack.
Simply unacceptable for a country like ours
In Bruno, we went through a regular cholera seasons
and cholera vaccinations were free for
brune people and for people with green cards.
That included us as expatriates working for the government.
However, we were part of, um, many of the expatriates
who would go to the pop-up clinics
and we would pay for our vaccinations.
We would pay double because as the cars came down one side
of the street and you went into the tent
to get your vaccination by volunteers,
there were people on the other side of the street sitting
and waiting people in their seventies,
eighties holding babies
and children waiting for people to come so
that they too could receive a vaccination against cholera.
This was an annual event
and would occur every six weeks over a three month period.
That's the kind of thing that can happen when you do not
have a well funded equitable public health system.
We see the impact of this in our New Zealand dental care,
and I've got a little bit of information
'cause this is something I'm working on at the moment.
I work as a teacher.
Prior to my current position, I worked
as an RTLB establishing, uh,
special needs registers across about 40
schools in the bay of plenty.
That work over a 10 year period gave me a very clear picture
of the needs of our youth demographic,
uh, on the register.
We included hearing and vision.
Um, we also included fundamental health.
The huge, um, numbers
of our young children suffering asthma
and respiratory, um, problems was quite frightening.
And those stats haven't changed.
The area where I've been called on
to help at the moment has been in dental care.
And we have a system in the Bay of painting now where
in terms of access for a free public system
where children are meant to be able to access dental care
between the ages of zero to 18 for Maori,
there's only 46% of people have, students have been able
to access dental care.
Only 40% of Pacifica have been able to access dental care,
whereas others that figure rises to 80%.
That is simply not equitable.
That is simply not good use of funding when you consider
that fundamental health risk from poor dental care
include endocarditis, respiratory issues such as asthma,
diabetes, cardiovascular disease.
This is a life situation which we setting
our young people up for.
It has economic impacts as well.
If you are looking at, um, lost productivity,
you're talking about 2.5 billion New Zealand dollars per
year in lost productivity due to poor dental care.
3.1 billion in reduced quality of life,
103 million in sick day cost hospitalization.
Eer, Erica, we have, we have reached five minutes,
so if you have any concluding remarks, that'll be good.
Simply that when you mix private
and public care, it's always going to be
Maori Pacifica, low income people who suffer the most.
It's wrong.
Excellent. Thank, thank, thank you very much
for, for your submission.
Um, we do, we do appreciate the time we've taken to submit
to the committee today, um,
and also for your re written evidence as well.
So thank you. Thank you very much.
We now will move on to multiple sclerosis, uh, New Zealand.
I do believe we've got Amanda Rose, um,
and Neil Woodham with with us
Gonna go.
It's good to see you both.
Um, as you're both aware, I'm Hamish Campbell.
Um, and welcome to the subcommittee
of the Health Civic Committee.
Uh, we do have your written, uh, submission, um,
and we've allocated 10 minutes, uh,
for your oral oral presentation.
I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you ko.
Thank you members of the Health Select Committee
for the opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Amanda Rose
and with me as Neil Woodham,
who is our multiple Graces new president, we're here to talk
to you today on behalf of the over 5,000 New Zealanders
diagnosed with multiple sclerosis.
And that's a number that's actually surged
by 67% in the last two decades.
We're also here to speak on behalf of the impacts
that the bill will have on the far now, the carers, people
of people with MS Health professionals
and also our 18 member organizations.
Organizations. It's our view that the proposed red, um,
redirections of health funding towards the private sector in
the bill puts timely access to care into threat.
It risks gutting the health system of specialist expertise,
worsening the workforce crisis and deepening geographic
and cultural inequities and con continuity of care.
As background, MS is a chronic neurological condition,
and it's mostly diagnosed in women.
Between 20 and 50 people can live with MS
for 30, 40, 50 years.
And while it is manageable
and treatable, time really matters.
MS is, um, complex to diagnose and it can be long
and it can be costly.
And delays to diagnosis
and treatment really do risk their irrevertible brain damage
and preventable disability and worsen long-term outcomes
and also increase cost to the health system in individuals.
So from a patient perspective, we see
that private healthcare does not mean faster healthcare.
So for example, Claire, um, is a person with ms
and she struggled to be diagnosed in both the public
and the private system for five years.
And a quote from her is that
by the time I finally received my diagnosis,
I've spent a literal fortune trying to find answers,
not only having time off work,
but in private specialist MRIs,
alternative therapies, and countless tests.
Each appointment felt like a financial and emotional gamble.
And all the while my health was deteriorating in slow,
sometimes imperceptible ways
that made me question my insanity.
People with MS are often, um, low
of lower socioeconomic groups
and they cannot afford private healthcare or insurance,
and they rely on the system that is already stretched thin.
Neurological conditions affect impact one in three New
Zealanders in their lifetime, but between the public
and the private sector,
New Zealand has just 18 neurologists working 69 FDE
and 10 of those had a specialism in ms.
That's one neurologist per 77,000 New Zealanders.
And that compares with Australia where there's one
for every 36,000 people.
So when we consider the implications
of privatization on the future health workforce, 20%
of ED presentations are neurological and often complex.
But we're concerned
and we hear from senior doctors who are concerned
that young doctors coming through are ill-equipped
to manage them because they are not getting the exposure
that they need early on in their training
and learning privatizing risks,
this compounding problem, compounding this problem.
And so if young doctors aren't exposed
to these conditions early through the public system,
they are less likely to pursue specialisms like neurology
research as well is a major draw card
for young and overseas doctors.
And New Zealand already has less opportunities, further
reducing opportunities and exposure risk, um,
risk in choosing more appealing opportunities.
So while you consider privatization might look
to improve efficiency, what does it risk?
It risks the disappearance
of specialist expertise in our private,
which our public needs.
We urge this committee
and the government to reconsider a move towards
privatization and instead invest more
into publicly funded services.
But access to neurologists is only one part of that puzzle.
When managing MS.
Research undeniably shows that the risk of MS disease
and disability progression reduces with early
and ongoing access to allied health services,
but there's little to no access to people
with long-term chronic conditions like ms.
So while we're pleased to see a long-term focus on mental
mental health strategy,
we really recommend also increasing prioritization
to the critical preventative
and allied health services such as physiotherapy
and occupational therapy
to improve long-term health outcomes.
Um, while Maori with MS are statistically lower,
their experiences are disproportionately worse.
To meet health equity goals, we must retain TU
or tangy commitments
and develop culturally appropriate strategies
that truly serve our vulnerable.
We really feel that the amendment bill misses an
opportunity, an opportunity
to actually fully revise far objectives and functions
and set the future directions.
Far must be better integrated into the wider health system
and its decisions must reflect the broader
societal benefits of medicine investment.
Just as pharma should be better,
invest in integrated social disability conditions like
multiple sclerosis sit between both health and disability,
but are often passed between.
And that disadvantages people.
And finally, clinicians are, are frontline advocates
and whose primary responsibility is the wellbeing,
their patients, the act to protect those
who speak up for patients.
And without that, we risk losing the very professionals
that our system and our New Zealanders depend on.
So we ask that this committee act in the interests
of our most vulnerable communities who have some
of our highest health and long-term needs.
Please invest in public care,
in our health workforce Reform, farm Act,
protect clinicians, and ensure the access
for Maori in our vulnerable communities is guaranteed.
Thank you and we welcome your questions.
Excellent. Uh, thank you for that, Amanda.
Um, I don't see any, any hands up from the panel,
but don't take that as, um, any, any sign we do have,
have your written submission.
Um, and also we have our officials online, um, as,
as well listening in and taking, taking it all in.
So thank thank you very much for, um, for your submission
and also, um, acknowledge Neil's work in it, um, as well.
So thank you very much
and we will now move to our next submitter,
which is Bridget Allen.
I do believe
Bridget, welcome to this subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing, uh, the session.
Uh, we do have your written submission
and we have allocated, uh, five minutes
for your oral, oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now
And thank you to the Health Select Committee
for this opportunity, uh, to speak with you today.
Um, I'm gonna take my submission as read
and just to note that I have made it as a private citizen,
um, as someone
who has worked in the health sector in New Zealand
for over 40 years in a, uh, multiple roles, um, in both
where I worked in ANA, looking
after the people of that whole area.
Um, and also here in uh, Wellington.
Uh, I've also done a number of, um, governance roles,
including sitting on the Health funding authority in the
late nineties and being reappointed to that by Annette King,
uh, through the transition period in there.
Um, through my career, I have absolutely seen the impact
of social and economic conditions in the history
of colonization and racism in New New Zealand
and the impact that has had on of poorer health
and wellbeing on marginalized groups.
And I support a number of the other submitters
who have been preparing, appearing
before the committee who have talked about the, uh, lack
of observation of the Treaty of wgi
and the need to retain I Maori partnership boards
and for TE and knowledge to stay on TE's board.
But I want to spend my time more of talking about some
of the things that I have seen in my practical work,
both working in, um, DHBs
and in primary care primary
where a focus on equity has been absolutely critical
to actually seeing better outcomes for our whole population
and particularly for more vulnerable groups.
In my submission, I talk about a couple of examples.
One being cardiovascular disease risk assessment processes,
a nationally mandated program,
but where local design actually was able
to implement a very integrated
and equitable approach, which that actually meant
that in the two years we were working, uh, under that
we were able to raise the uptake
of the CVD risk assessment from 30% to almost 90%,
not just for certain groups,
but for all of the groups in the
population who were at risk.
More recently, I have worked as part of the DHBs
and phs here in the Greater Wellington region
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
And I wanna particularly acknowledge Dr.
Vel for her work as an infectious specialist, uh,
diseases specialist at that time.
But we brought an equity framework to the work
that we were doing, and this is one
of the reasons why the Wellington areas uptake of first
of all, testing and then the vaccination were successful
and were able to reach significantly high proportions
of Maori and Pacifica people as well as, uh,
fa kaha disabled people and our rainbow
and migrant communities.
We had to use a very focused approach
that actually acknowledged the differences in those diverse
communities and tailored our approach to them in order
to achieve those equities of outcomes.
So on the basis of those experiences, I have seen,
it has been really critical that our health system is guided
by principles, the health principles, which include equity,
and which also include those to protect
and promote people's health and wellbeing.
I'm strongly recommending that we keep the health principles
as the guides for the work of the whole
of the health system in particular.
I also want to see,
Looks like we've just, um, lost, lost our submitter.
Um,
What happened? I'm back again.
Excellent. Brilliant. Okay, thank you.
Um, one of the things we have learned from the wide range
of international evidence as well as in New Zealand, is
that in order to have cost effective service delivery,
we really need to address the wider determinants of health
that affect people's health in the
communities that they live in.
And so, again, I would be strongly advocating
to retain the health principle about protecting
and promoting people's health and wellbeing.
And also that we retain
the provision under section 93 4
to keep the expert advisory committee on public health
with the full range of skills
and things that are needed in that space.
Um, in my opinion,
this bill is actually not needed and should be abandoned.
I don't think it's going to really do anything
to improve the health of the well, uh, people of New Zealand
or to, um, enable the health system
to work any more effectively.
I think there's a lot of other work that really needs
to go on to have our whole system be an effective,
cost effective and, um, inclusive and responsive one.
I'll leave it to that. I'm happy to take questions.
Excellent. Do we have any, any questions now?
I don't, I don't see any hands, uh, shoot,
shooting up Bridgette.
Uh, but once again, as I've said to other submitters,
don't take that as a any sign.
We, you have presented a very concise
and well-written, uh, written evidence, um,
and appreciate you taking the time today to come
and speak to us, um,
and outline, outline those issues as well.
So thank, thank you. Thank you very much.
Uh, we will just, um, suspend for 10 minutes, um, while some
of the other submitters come, come online.
Um, so we will be back in 10 minutes.
So there'll be one 30 I.